1. WHY PREPROCESS: THE PITT SMART LIVING PROJECT
  - The lecture opens with a real project the professor ran as
    principal investigator: the Pitt Smart Living Project, funded
    by the National Science Foundation. Tagline: building a smart
    city economy and information ecosystem to motivate
    cross-social transportation behavior.
  - The motivating problem: you are at a bus stop, the app says
    two minutes, the bus arrives full, and you either miss it or
    ride crammed.
  - The project goal: an app that notifies commuters when their
    bus will be full. That requires high-quality real-time
    information. Two add-ons on top of the notification:
      Incentives to take a later bus (a coffee discount at the
        corner store, discounts on future tickets). The rider
        relaxes 15 to 20 minutes and boards a less crowded bus,
        which also helps the people already on the first bus.
      Alternative multi-modal routing (shared bikes, walk to a
        different stop and catch a different bus).
  - COVID disrupted the project, but the team collected a lot of
    data and built a lot of models from it.
  - KEY TERM: preprocessing: the cleanup and reshaping you do to
    raw data before modeling, so the model sees data that is
    complete, consistent, and comparable. (added definition)

2. WHAT DIRTY DATA LOOKS LIKE
  - The lecture shows a map of bus stop data (see the slide with
    the red and green push pins). Red pins are instances where a
    bus stopped somewhere that could not be matched to a proper
    bus stop for that route. Green pins are the actual bus stops.
  - Two different causes of the same symptom:
      Human error. One line of red pins runs down a completely
        different bus route. The Port Authority explained that
        someone was supposed to manually change the route the bus
        was assigned to and did not. A similar parallel track
        appears above the correct 61C line.
      GPS error. Zoomed into downtown, buses appear in the
        water. Nobody coded a route through the river. The GPS
        could not get a proper fix.
  - KEY TERM: urban canyon effect: GPS devices need line of sight
    to at least three satellites to get a proper fix. Tall
    skyscrapers downtown block that line of sight, so positions
    drift. This is a technology failure, not a data entry one.
  - How do we know the river data is wrong? If there were buses
    in the river, there would be a news story. (There was a bus
    in a sinkhole in Pittsburgh in October 2018, and that made
    national news and memes.) The lesson: domain knowledge and
    common sense are part of validation. (added note)

3. TYPES OF ATTRIBUTES
  - KEY TERM: attribute: one measured property of a record, a
    column in the table. Also called a feature or variable.
    (added definition)
  - String (categorical) attributes come in three flavors:
      KEY TERM: nominal: strings with no order among them.
        Example (added): color, or the port a passenger boarded at.
      KEY TERM: binary: one of two options. Example (added):
        yes or no.
      KEY TERM: ordinal: strings with an implied order. The
        lecture's example: small, medium, large, extra large.
  - Numeric attributes come in two flavors:
      KEY TERM: discrete: a finite or countably infinite set of
        values. Examples: zip codes, counts. Usually stored as
        integers. A 0/1 binary attribute can also be treated as
        discrete.
      KEY TERM: continuous: real numbers as values. Examples:
        temperature, height, weight.
  - Practical caveat from the lecture: a computer cannot store an
    infinite number of digits, so continuous values are recorded
    with a fixed number of digits, typically as floating-point
    variables. There is some sensitivity in how much accuracy you
    get, but modern floating-point formats handle significant
    accuracy.
  - KEY TERM: floating-point: the binary number format computers
    use for real numbers, storing a fixed number of significant
    digits plus an exponent. (added definition)

4. TYPES OF DATASETS
  - The lecture splits datasets into three categories: records,
    ordered sets, and graphs.
  - Record data:
      KEY TERM: record data: each record has a fixed set of
        attributes. Think of rows in a spreadsheet. The lecture's
        slide shows ten records with a refund flag, marital
        status, income, and a cheated flag.
      KEY TERM: data matrix: record data where every attribute is
        numeric. Represented as an m by n matrix, m rows (one per
        object) and n columns (one per attribute). This is the
        form most modeling algorithms want. (added note)
      KEY TERM: document data: data that comes from text. Not
        covered much in this course, but you should know it
        exists. Preprocessing for text has three standard steps:
          Remove stop words.
          Convert everything to lowercase so matching ignores
            case.
          Stemming.
      KEY TERM: stop words: very frequent words that carry little
        meaning on their own, like "and", "the", and articles.
      KEY TERM: stemming: reducing a word to its core so that
        variants map to one term. The lecture's example: voted,
        vote, votes, voting all become vote.
      KEY TERM: term vector: after preprocessing, each document
        becomes a vector with one component per term, and the
        value is how many times that term appears in that
        document.
      KEY TERM: transaction data: think grocery store, a list of
        products bought in one shopping trip. You could store it
        as record data with one column per possible product, but
        most cells would be empty, so that is not ideal. An
        upcoming module covers transaction data.
      KEY TERM: sparsity: the condition where most values in a
        table are zero or empty. (added definition)
  - Graph data:
      KEY TERM: graph data: data where the relationships between
        objects are the point (added definition). The lecture's
        examples: a co-star graph (which actors appeared in the
        same movie),
        molecules in chemistry, and web pages linking to each
        other. Many dedicated techniques exist for graph data.
  - Ordered data:
      KEY TERM: sequence data: ordered transactions or values
        where predicting what comes next is the interesting
        question. Number-sequence puzzles are the everyday
        version. Genomic data is the famous case, not covered
        much in this course.
      KEY TERM: spatiotemporal data: data indexed by both place
        and time (added definition). The lecture's example:
        monthly land and ocean temperature over many months for
        locations around the world.
  - A term vector, for example. Three tiny documents, "the bus
    was late", "late bus, late train", and "the train was early",
    with "the" and "was" removed as stop words, produce this
    table (one row per document, one column per term):

        bus  early  late  train
      0   1      0     1      0
      1   1      0     2      1
      2   0      1     0      1

    Row 1 has a 2 under late because the word appears twice in
    that document. That count is the whole idea.

5. TYPES OF PREPROCESSING
  - The lecture lists the preprocessing jobs, simplest first:
      Detect and handle missing data.
      Detect and handle outliers.
      Feature scaling and normalization on numerical values.
      Feature engineering and transformation.
      Encoding categorical variables.
    The last three involve more processing and more math and are
    covered in future lessons.
  - Missing data, two simple options:
      Delete the record that has the missing value.
      If the record is too valuable to delete, predict the
        missing value using the mean of everybody else for that
        attribute.
  - KEY TERM: imputation: filling a missing value with an
    estimate such as the attribute's mean. (added definition)
  - KEY TERM: outlier: a value that is clearly an exception to the
    norm. You need good ways to detect them and handle them. The
    simplest handling is to remove them. Other ways exist.
  - KEY TERM: feature scaling: rescaling numeric attributes so
    that attributes measured in different units become
    comparable. (added definition)
  - KEY TERM: feature engineering: building new attributes from
    existing ones, or transforming existing ones, so the model
    has better inputs to work with. (added definition)
  - KEY TERM: encoding: mapping string categories to numbers so
    an algorithm can consume them. (added definition)
  - Missing data, for example. Five bus stops with rider counts,
    two of them missing:

      import pandas as pd, numpy as np
      df_r = pd.DataFrame({"stop": list("ABCDE"),
                           "riders": [12, np.nan, 20, 16, np.nan]})
      df_drop = df_r.dropna() ## option 1, delete records
      m = df_r["riders"].mean() ## 16.0
      df_fill = df_r.fillna({"riders": m}) ## option 2, impute

    df_drop keeps stops A, C, and D. df_fill keeps all five and
    writes 16.0 into B and E, since (12 + 20 + 16) / 3 = 16. Note
    the trade: dropping loses two of five records, filling keeps
    them but invents two values that sit exactly at the average,
    which pulls the column's spread down.

6. KEY TAKEAWAYS
  - Real data is dirty for more than one reason. The bus data had
    both human error (wrong route assigned) and GPS error
    (urban canyon GPS drift). Different causes need different
    fixes. (added note)
  - Attributes: nominal, binary, ordinal for strings. Discrete,
    continuous for numbers.
  - Datasets: records (record data, data matrix, document data,
    transaction data), graphs, ordered (sequences, genomic,
    spatiotemporal).
  - Text preprocessing: stop words out, lowercase, stem, then
    count into term vectors.
  - Preprocessing jobs: missing data, outliers, scaling and
    normalization, feature engineering, categorical encoding.

7. QUIZ-SAFE FACTS
  - Pitt Smart Living Project: NSF funded, professor was
    principal investigator, goal was an app that tells commuters
    when their bus will be full, plus incentives to wait and
    multi-modal alternatives.
  - Red push pins: places a bus stopped that could not be matched
    to a proper bus stop. Green: the real stops.
  - Buses in the river: GPS error from the urban canyon effect.
    GPS needs line of sight to at least three satellites.
  - Wrong-route line of red pins: human error, a manual route
    change that was not made.
  - String attribute types: nominal (no order), binary (two
    options), ordinal (implied order, e.g. S, M, L, XL).
  - Numeric attribute types: discrete (finite or countably
    infinite, e.g. zip codes, counts, stored as integers) and
    continuous (real numbers, e.g. temperature, height, weight,
    stored as floating point).
  - Data matrix: m by n, m rows one per object, n columns one per
    attribute.
  - Document preprocessing: remove stop words, lowercase, stem.
    Result: a term vector per document with term counts.
  - Transaction data as one column per product is sparse.
  - Graph data examples: co-star graph, molecules, web page links.
  - Sequence data example: genomic data. Spatiotemporal example:
    monthly land and ocean temperature by location.
  - Simplest missing-data handling: delete the record, or fill
    with the attribute mean.
  - Simplest outlier handling: remove it.
