1. FROM SPREAD TO VARIANCE
  - Video 1 (the linear algebra primer) projected the penguin
    cloud onto a line and eyeballed how spread out the projected
    points were. The widest direction was found by hand, trying a
    few angles and picking the best.
  - This video does it in an automated way. The data's own
    covariance hands you the widest direction, through
    eigenvectors. That direction is the first principal component.
  - First change: "spread" becomes "variance." Spread is the
    visual thing, variance is the mathematical thing.
  - KEY TERM: variance (of a projection): the average squared
    distance of the projected points from their mean. Bigger
    variance means more spread along that direction. The Video 1
    question becomes precise: which direction has the maximum
    projected variance?
  - The code in this video only generates the figures. You do not
    need to understand it to follow the material.

2. VARIANCE AND COVARIANCE, BY HAND
  - KEY TERM: variance of one feature: the average squared
    deviation from its mean. Compute the mean (x bar), subtract it
    from every value, square each difference, sum them, divide by
    n. One number for how spread out x is.
  - KEY TERM: covariance of two features: the average of the
    product of their deviations. For each row, (x minus x bar)
    times (y minus y bar), then sum and divide by n. It measures
    how the two move together.
      Positive: when x sits above its mean, y tends to sit above
        its mean too (and below together).
      Negative: one high while the other is low.
      Near zero: unrelated, no shared pattern.
  - The covariance of a feature with itself is its variance. Put
    x in for y and the product becomes a square. This is exactly
    why the covariance matrix (section 4) has variances on its
    diagonal and covariances off it.
  - Why the product of deviations works (added explanation): the
    product is positive only when both deviations have the same
    sign. Rows where both are above the mean, or both below,
    push the sum up. Rows where the signs disagree pull it down.
    Rows where either sits at its mean contribute nothing. The
    average of all that is a single number that says whether the
    two features lean the same way.
  - An example. Five days at a lemonade stand, daily high in
    Fahrenheit and cups sold:
      temp: 68, 74, 80, 86, 92 (mean 80)
      cups: 31, 40, 52, 57, 70 (mean 50)
      temp deviations: -12, -6, 0, 6, 12
      cups deviations: -19, -10, 2, 7, 20
      squared temp deviations sum to 360, so var(temp) = 360 / 5
        = 72.0
      squared cups deviations sum to 914, so var(cups) = 914 / 5
        = 182.8
      products of deviations: 228, 60, 0, 42, 240, sum 570, so
        cov(temp, cups) = 570 / 5 = 114.0
    Every product came out zero or positive: hot days sell more
    cups. The covariance is large and positive.

3. POPULATION FORM VS SAMPLE FORM
  - The lecture divides by n. This is called the population form,
    used for a clean picture.
  - KEY TERM: sample form: the same formulas with n minus 1 in
    the denominator instead of n. The idea, as the professor puts
    it, is that you assume you already took one out. Most of the
    mathematical support in Python, including NumPy's np.cov,
    computes the sample form by default.
  - The distinction does not change any of the geometry that
    follows. Every entry scales by the same factor n / (n - 1),
    so the ellipse keeps its shape and the eigenvectors (section
    8) keep their directions (added explanation). Only the
    eigenvalues scale.
  - In the lemonade example, n / (n - 1) = 5 / 4 = 1.25.
    np.cov(temp, cups) returns 90.0, 142.5, 228.5 where the
    population form gave 72.0, 114.0, 182.8. Each number is 1.25
    times bigger. np.cov(..., bias=True) gives the population
    form.

4. THE COVARIANCE MATRIX
  - KEY TERM: covariance matrix: for two features, a 2 by 2
    matrix that packs together how each feature varies and how
    they vary together. Written C:
      row 1: var(x), cov(x, y)
      row 2: cov(x, y), var(y)
    The variances sit on the diagonal (top-left to bottom-right)
    and the covariance sits in both off-diagonal spots, so the
    matrix is symmetric (added definition: a matrix equal to its
    own mirror image across the diagonal).
  - For the lemonade data:
      C = [[72.0, 114.0],
           [114.0, 182.8]]
  - It has a shape you can see: the data ellipse. A tilted,
    stretched ellipse means the two features are correlated.
  - KEY TERM: data ellipse: the ellipse drawn from the covariance
    matrix, centered on the mean of the cloud, whose axes and
    tilt show the directions and amount of spread (added
    definition). See the figure produced by cell 6 of
    6.1Covariance_eigenvectors.ipynb for the penguin version.

5. WHY A MATRIX OF FOUR NUMBERS IS AN ELLIPSE
  - The obvious objection: a 2 by 2 matrix has four numbers, how
    is that an ellipse? Answer: the four numbers do not become an
    ellipse directly. They define a formula, and the ellipse is
    the set of points where that formula equals a fixed constant
    c.
  - The formula: take any point (x, y) measured from the center,
    and compute [x y] times C inverse times [x y] as a column.
    Setting that equal to c is the equation of an ellipse centered
    at the origin. Bigger c, bigger ellipse. The two ellipses in
    the notebook figures are drawn at 1 and 2 standard deviations,
    which are just two choices of c.
  - KEY TERM: matrix inverse (C inverse, written with a superscript
    -1): the matrix that undoes C, so C times C inverse is the
    identity matrix, the matrix equivalent of the number 1 (added
    definition). Dividing by a matrix is not defined, so
    multiplying by the inverse is how you divide by the spread.
  - Multiplying the formula out gives a mix of x squared, y
    squared, and xy terms. The xy term is what tilts the ellipse
    (added).
  - What the quantity means in practice: it is a distance measured
    in units of the data's own spread. One step out along a wide
    direction counts the same as a small step along a narrow one.
    The ellipse is "all the points equally far from the center,
    according to the data."
  - An example with the lemonade C. Its inverse is
      [[1.1039, -0.6884],
       [-0.6884, 0.4348]]
    and plugging in a few points from the center gives:
      (6, 5): 9.30
      (12, 20): 2.43
      (6, -5): 91.91
      (0, 10): 43.48
    The point (12, 20) is much farther from the center than
    (6, -5) by a ruler, yet it scores far smaller. It lies along
    the long axis of the cloud, where the data normally reaches.
    The point (6, -5) runs against the grain (hot day, fewer
    cups), so the data treats it as far out. That is the whole
    idea of measuring distance by the data's spread.
  - The link to what comes next: the eigenvectors of C are the
    ellipse's axes (which way it points), and the eigenvalues are
    how long those axes are (how far it stretches each way).
    Finding the eigenvectors is the same as finding the ellipse's
    natural directions.

6. WHAT EACH ENTRY DOES TO THE ELLIPSE
  - Each entry has a visible job. The diagonal entries set how far
    the ellipse stretches along each axis. The off-diagonal
    covariance tilts it.
      cov = 0: the features are unrelated. With var(x) = var(y)
        as well: a perfectly round data ellipse.
      var(x) bigger than var(y): stretches sideways.
      var(y) bigger than var(x): stretches upward.
      cov not zero: adds a tilt. The two features are correlated.
  - See the four-panel figure produced by cell 9 of
    6.1Covariance_eigenvectors.ipynb, which draws each case from an
    illustrative covariance matrix rather than the penguin data.
  - Reading the lemonade matrix this way: var(cups) = 182.8 is
    bigger than var(temp) = 72.0, so the ellipse is taller than
    it is wide, and cov = 114.0 is large and positive, so it tilts
    up and to the right.

7. VARIANCE AS A FUNCTION OF DIRECTION
  - Instead of trying a few directions by hand, sweep through all
    of them and compute the projected variance at each angle. The
    result is a smooth curve with a single clear peak: the
    direction of maximum spread. See the two-panel figure from
    cell 11 of 6.1Covariance_eigenvectors.ipynb.
  - KEY TERM: projected variance: the variance of the numbers you
    get by projecting every point onto one direction (the dot
    product of each centered point with a unit vector along that
    direction) (added definition). It is a plain number you can
    compute for any angle, which is what makes the sweep possible.
  - The sweep for the lemonade data (population variance of the
    projection, angle measured from the temp axis):
      0 degrees: 72.0 (this is just var(temp))
      30 degrees: 198.4
      45 degrees: 241.4
      58 degrees: 254.1 (the peak)
      60 degrees: 253.8
      90 degrees: 182.8 (this is just var(cups))
      120 degrees: 56.4
      148 degrees: 0.65 (the floor)
    At 0 and 90 degrees you get the diagonal entries of C back,
    because projecting onto an axis is the same as reading that
    feature. Every other angle mixes the two, and the mixing is
    where the covariance earns its keep.
  - The point of the sweep is that you no longer have to draw
    anything. You can compute it, plot it if you want to
    understand it, and read off the peak.

8. EIGENVECTORS AND EIGENVALUES: THE PEAK WITHOUT THE SWEEP
  - The payoff: you do not have to sweep at all. The problem has
    a mathematical solution, and that solution is an eigenvector.
  - KEY TERM: eigenvector (of C): a special direction that C
    leaves pointing the same way. Multiplying it by C only
    stretches it, never rotates it. Most directions get knocked
    askew by C. These hold their heading.
  - KEY TERM: eigenvalue (lambda): the stretch factor for that
    eigenvector. Here lambda is the variance along that
    eigenvector.
  - The equation: C v = lambda v. C is the covariance matrix, v
    is the eigenvector, lambda is the eigenvalue. Read it as "C
    acting on v gives back v, just scaled."
  - The top eigenvector points along the maximum variance (the
    peak of the sweep). The rest are perpendicular to it. Because
    C is symmetric, the eigenvectors come out orthonormal:
    perpendicular and unit length, the terms from Video 1.
  - KEY TERM: orthonormal: a set of vectors that are all
    perpendicular to each other (dot product zero) and all of
    length one (from the primer, restated here).
  - How to compute them is well beyond this course. The professor
    only needs you to know the property and what it buys you.
    In practice the computer does it in one call.
  - The lemonade numbers. np.linalg.eigh(C) on the population
    matrix gives, sorted largest first:
      eigenvalues: 254.15 and 0.65
      top eigenvector: (0.5305, 0.8477)
      second eigenvector: (-0.8477, 0.5305)
    Check the claims against section 7:
      254.15 is exactly the peak of the sweep, and 0.65 is the
        floor. The eigenvalues are the max and min projected
        variances.
      The top eigenvector sits at an angle of 58 degrees, the
        angle where the sweep peaked. atan2(0.8477, 0.5305) gives
        57.96 degrees.
      The two eigenvectors have dot product 0 and length 1 each.
        Orthonormal, as promised.
      The eigenvalues sum to 254.8, which is 72.0 + 182.8, the
        trace of C (added definition: the sum of the diagonal
        entries). Added observation: the total variance is
        conserved, it just gets redistributed between the new
        axes.
  - Watching the "stretch, never rotate" property in numbers:
      C times (0.5305, 0.8477) = (134.83, 215.43), which is
        254.15 times (0.5305, 0.8477). Same heading, longer.
      C times (1, 0), which is not an eigenvector, gives
        (72, 114), a vector pointing at 57.7 degrees. The matrix
        swung the temp axis almost onto the top eigenvector. That
        is what "knocked askew" looks like.
  - Eigenvector sign is arbitrary (added note). (0.5305, 0.8477)
    and (-0.5305, -0.8477) are the same line. Different libraries,
    or the same library on different machines, can return either
    one. Compare directions, not signs.
  - On the penguin data, PC1 is the orange arrow and PC2 the blue
    arrow in the figure from cell 13 of
    6.1Covariance_eigenvectors.ipynb. PC1 is the direction the
    data says is best, found in one step from the covariance
    matrix, no guessing.
  - The callback to Video 1: the by-hand direction was not quite
    the best. PC1 is. And PC2 is tiny, and therefore not as
    important: flipper length and body mass are so strongly
    correlated that almost all the variation lives along a single
    direction. Hold that thought, it is what makes dimensionality
    reduction possible.
  - Code for the whole computation, on the lemonade data:

      import numpy as np

      temp = np.array([68., 74., 80., 86., 92.]) ## daily high, F
      cups = np.array([31., 40., 52., 57., 70.]) ## cups sold
      pts = np.column_stack([temp - temp.mean(), cups - cups.mean()])
      C = np.cov(pts.T, bias=True) ## population form, divides by n
      evals, evecs = np.linalg.eigh(C) ## symmetric, ascending order
      order = np.argsort(evals)[::-1] ## largest first
      evals, evecs = evals[order], evecs[:, order]
      print(C, evals, evecs[:, 0], (pts @ evecs).var(axis=0), sep='\n')

    Output:

      [[ 72.  114. ]
       [114.  182.8]]
      [254.14841222   0.65158778]
      [0.53052505 0.84766926]
      [254.14841222   0.65158778]

    np.linalg.eigh is the routine for symmetric matrices. It
    returns eigenvalues in ascending order, so the sort flips
    them to largest first, matching the PC1, PC2 convention. The
    last printed line is explained in section 9.

9. ROTATING INTO THE EIGEN-BASIS
  - KEY TERM: eigen-basis: using the eigenvectors as the new axes
    of the plot (added definition). "Basis" is the linear algebra
    word for a set of axes.
  - If you use the eigenvectors as your new axes, the cloud
    straightens out. The tilt disappears. PC1 becomes the
    horizontal axis, PC2 the vertical. See the before and after
    figure from cell 16 of 6.1Covariance_eigenvectors.ipynb.
  - KEY TERM: principal component (PC1, PC2): the new axes. PC1
    is the direction of maximum variance, PC2 the next, and so on.
    PC1 is a composition of the original dimensions, not a direct
    one-to-one mapping to flipper length or body mass.
  - In the new coordinates the two axes are decorrelated. All the
    leftover spread is neatly separated from the main direction.
  - KEY TERM: decorrelated: the covariance between the new
    coordinates is zero (added definition). The tilt was the
    covariance, and the rotation removed it.
  - Mechanically the rotation is one matrix multiply: centered
    points times the eigenvector matrix. Each new coordinate is
    the dot product of the point with one eigenvector, which is
    exactly the projection from Video 1.
  - The lemonade data rotated. The five points become:
      (-22.47, 0.09)
      (-11.66, -0.22)
      (1.70, 1.06)
      (9.12, -1.37)
      (23.32, 0.44)
    The first coordinate runs from -22 to +23. The second barely
    leaves zero. The covariance matrix of the rotated points is
      [[254.15, 0.0],
       [0.0, 0.65]]
    Diagonal, with the eigenvalues on it. The off-diagonal
    covariance is gone, and the variances of the new axes are
    the eigenvalues. That is what the last print line in the
    section 8 code shows.

10. ONE CAUTION FOR LATER: SCALE MATTERS
  - Everything above was drawn on axes the professor chose:
    flipper in millimeters, body mass in hundreds of grams. The
    covariance matrix, and therefore the eigenvectors, depend on
    those units. Change the scale of an axis and the best
    direction can tilt.
  - An example. Count the lemonade cups in dozens instead of
    single cups (divide by 12). The temperature column is
    untouched. The population covariance matrix becomes
      [[72.0, 9.5],
       [9.5, 1.27]]
    and the top eigenvector swings from 58 degrees to about 7.5
    degrees. Same stand, same five days, and the "best direction"
    is now nearly the temperature axis, because temperature is
    numerically the biggest thing left. The data did not change.
    The units did.
  - That is why, before running PCA on real data with very
    different units, the features get standardized first. That is
    the subject of a later video. For now the flag is planted:
    scaling changes the answer.

11. WHAT WE HAVE, AND WHAT IS NEXT
  - We can now name the widest direction without guessing. It is
    the top eigenvector of the covariance matrix, and its
    eigenvalue tells how much variance lives along it.
  - This procedure, find the eigenvectors of the covariance
    matrix and use them as new axes, is Principal Component
    Analysis. The next video gives it its name and explains why
    we use it: turning many correlated features into a few
    informative ones.

12. KEY TAKEAWAYS
  - Spread became variance. Variance of one feature: average
    squared deviation from the mean. Covariance of two: average
    product of deviations. cov(x, x) = var(x).
  - Population form divides by n. Sample form divides by n - 1
    and is what np.cov does by default. Same geometry either way.
  - Covariance matrix: variances on the diagonal, covariance off
    it. Symmetric. Drawn, it is the data ellipse.
  - Diagonal entries stretch the ellipse along the axes.
    Covariance tilts it. Tilt means correlated.
  - Projected variance is a curve over angle with one peak. The
    peak direction is the top eigenvector of C. Its eigenvalue is
    the variance there. C v = lambda v.
  - Eigenvectors of a symmetric matrix are orthonormal. Using
    them as axes straightens the cloud and decorrelates the
    coordinates.
  - Units change the covariance matrix, so units change the
    eigenvectors. Standardize before PCA on mixed-unit data.

13. QUIZ-SAFE FACTS
  - Variance of a feature: average squared deviation from its
    mean. Covariance: average product of two features'
    deviations.
  - Covariance positive: features rise above their means
    together. Negative: one high, other low. Near zero:
    unrelated.
  - Covariance of a feature with itself equals its variance.
  - Population form divides by n. Sample form divides by n - 1.
    NumPy's np.cov uses the sample form by default.
  - The 2 by 2 covariance matrix: var(x) and var(y) on the
    diagonal, cov(x, y) in both off-diagonal positions.
  - The covariance matrix drawn as a shape is the data ellipse.
    A tilted, stretched ellipse means the features are correlated.
  - The ellipse is the set of points where [x y] C inverse [x y]
    equals a constant c.
  - Equal variances and zero covariance: round ellipse. Larger
    var(x): stretches sideways. Larger var(y): stretches upward.
    Nonzero covariance: tilt.
  - The eigenvectors of C are the ellipse's axes. The eigenvalues
    are how long those axes are.
  - An eigenvector is a direction that C only stretches, never
    rotates. The stretch factor is the eigenvalue. C v = lambda v.
  - The top eigenvector points along maximum variance. Its
    eigenvalue is the variance along it. The other eigenvectors
    are perpendicular.
  - Because C is symmetric, its eigenvectors are orthonormal.
  - Using the eigenvectors as new axes: PC1 horizontal, PC2
    vertical, cloud straightens, axes decorrelated.
  - PC1 is a composition of the original features, not one of
    them.
  - In the penguin slice, PC2 is tiny because flipper length and
    body mass are strongly correlated.
  - Scaling changes the answer. The covariance matrix and the
    eigenvectors depend on the units, so standardize first.
  - Finding the eigenvectors of the covariance matrix and using
    them as axes is Principal Component Analysis.
