1. THE PROCEDURE HAS A NAME
  - Recap of the road so far. Video 1: a cloud of penguins
    (flipper length and body mass), projected onto one direction,
    and the spread of the projected points depends on the
    direction you pick. Video 2: the direction of highest spread
    comes from the eigenvectors of the covariance matrix, no
    guessing. This video names the whole procedure and explains
    why anyone bothers.
  - KEY TERM: Principal Component Analysis (PCA): look at the
    data, identify the eigenvectors of its covariance matrix, and
    use them as new axes. Reposition the data by projecting onto
    those axes.
  - KEY TERM: principal components: the new axes. Written PC1,
    PC2, PC3, and so on.
      PC1 captures the most variance.
      PC2 captures the most of what is left, and is perpendicular
        to PC1.
      PC3, PC4, and onward continue the pattern, each
        perpendicular to all the earlier ones.
  - Nothing here is new math. It is a name for what Video 2
    already built. The eigenvectors are the principal components,
    ordered by their eigenvalues (added restatement).
  - The code in this video only generates the plots from real
    data. Starting with the next video, the code is the kind you
    should know how to use.

2. WHY WE NEED IT: TOO MANY FEATURES TO LOOK AT
  - A confession from the professor: the original penguin data
    have four features, not two. Two were picked to make the
    visualization interesting. The four are bill length, bill
    depth, flipper length, and body mass.
  - To see four features by eye you would look at every pair.
    With four features that is six separate scatterplots.
  - KEY TERM: pair plot: a grid of scatterplots, one for every
    pair of features, with each feature's histogram on the
    diagonal. The x-axis of column j is feature j, the y-axis of
    row i is feature i.
  - The count grows fast:
      10 features: 45 plots.
      20 features: nearly 200 (190, to be exact).
    You cannot hold that in your head. This is the problem PCA
    solves.
  - Where the count comes from (added explanation): the number
    of unordered pairs from k features is k times (k - 1) divided
    by 2. Each feature pairs with every other one, and the
    division by 2 stops you from counting flipper-vs-mass and
    mass-vs-flipper as two plots. A few more values from the same
    formula:
      5 features: 10 plots
      8 features: 28
      12 features: 66
      30 features: 435
      50 features: 1225
  - Reading the professor's four-feature pair plot (see the
    figure from cell 5 of 7.1.what_pca_is.ipynb): rows and columns
    are bill length, bill depth, flipper length, body mass in that
    order. Diagonal tiles are histograms: x-axis is the value,
    y-axis is how many times the value shows up. Off-diagonal
    tiles are two-feature scatterplots. The two orange tiles are
    flipper length versus body mass, the same pair from Videos 1
    and 2, appearing twice because the grid shows each pair from
    both orientations.

3. THE SLICE WE KNOW IS ONE TILE
  - The flipper-versus-mass panel is one of six views. It is the
    exact 2-D slice from Videos 1 and 2, and it was picked by
    hand.
  - PCA's promise: instead of picking one pair by hand, find the
    single best 2-D view built from all four features at once.
  - So the goal is not "pick the two most important features."
    It is "build two new axes out of all four" (added emphasis,
    the distinction that section 8 of the next note relies on).

4. WHY IT WORKS: FEATURES ARE REDUNDANT
  - Why not just keep all four, if you measured four? Because
    often some of the features are redundant.
  - Professor's examples: height and weight normally have a lot
    of correlation. Someone super tall and extremely skinny is
    rare. Both measurements matter, but they do not differ a lot.
    Sharper still: a person's left arm and right arm are almost
    identical, so there is no need to keep both in a data set of
    human measurements.
  - In the pair plot, many panels are clearly tilted, meaning the
    features move together. Flipper length and body mass rise
    together. Bill depth trends opposite to the others.
  - KEY TERM: redundant features: features that carry overlapping
    information because they are correlated (added definition).
    Knowing one tells you most of the other.
  - That redundancy is what lets PCA compress four features into
    two, or even one, without losing much. The leftover directions
    barely vary, exactly as PC2 was tiny in Video 2.
  - There are more sophisticated reasons for dimension reduction.
    The professor offers correlation as the intuitive one: find
    the features that correlate, remove the one that duplicates
    another, keep the same information with fewer variables.
  - An example. Sixty adults, four measurements: height, left arm
    length, right arm length, weight. Left arm tracks height,
    right arm is a near copy of left arm, and weight tracks
    height loosely. The correlation matrix, where each entry is
    the covariance of two features rescaled to run from -1 to 1,
    with 1.0 on the diagonal, each feature with itself (added
    definition):
      height and left arm: 0.96
      height and right arm: 0.95
      left arm and right arm: 0.99
      weight with each of the others: 0.75 to 0.78
    Standardize, take the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix,
    and the cumulative share of variance by component is
      PC1: 90.1 percent
      PC1 + PC2: 98.4 percent
      PC1 + PC2 + PC3: 99.8 percent
      all four: 100 percent
    Four measurements, and one axis already holds 90 percent of
    the variation. Two hold 98 percent. The other two axes are
    measurement noise wearing a lab coat. That is redundancy, and
    that is what PCA cashes in on.
  - Code for that example:

      import numpy as np

      def pairs(k): return k * (k - 1) // 2 ## scatterplots per pair-plot
      print([pairs(k) for k in (4, 10, 20, 50)])

      rng = np.random.default_rng(7)
      ht = rng.normal(170, 9, 60) ## height, cm
      la = 0.44 * ht + rng.normal(0, 1.2, 60) ## left arm, cm
      ra = la + rng.normal(0, 0.6, 60) ## right arm, near copy
      wt = 0.9 * ht - 85 + rng.normal(0, 7, 60) ## weight, kg
      X = np.column_stack([ht, la, ra, wt])
      Z = (X - X.mean(axis=0)) / X.std(axis=0) ## standardize
      evals = np.linalg.eigvalsh(np.cov(Z.T))[::-1] ## largest first
      print(np.corrcoef(X.T).round(2), np.cumsum(evals / evals.sum()).round(3), sep='\n')

    Output:

      [6, 45, 190, 1225]
      [[1.   0.96 0.95 0.78]
       [0.96 1.   0.99 0.77]
       [0.95 0.99 1.   0.75]
       [0.78 0.77 0.75 1.  ]]
      [0.901 0.984 0.998 1.   ]

    The data are generated with a fixed seed, so the numbers
    reproduce. np.linalg.eigvalsh returns only the eigenvalues,
    ascending, which is all this check needs.

5. THE TWO PAYOFFS
  - Payoff 1, dimensionality reduction. Keep the top few
    principal components and drop the rest. Four features become
    two coordinates you can plot. A single 2-D picture instead of
    six.
  - KEY TERM: dimensionality reduction: replacing many features
    with fewer new ones while keeping most of the information
    (added definition). In PCA the new ones are the top principal
    components.
  - Payoff 2, decorrelation. The new axes are perpendicular and
    uncorrelated (the eigen-basis from Video 2). Each principal
    component carries independent information, with no redundancy
    left. If something is correlated it does not make sense to
    carry it along, and PCA identifies those correlations and
    keeps only what is independent.
  - KEY TERM: decorrelation: transforming the data so the new
    coordinates have zero covariance with each other (added
    definition). The tilt in every pair-plot tile is gone.

6. THE PICTURE FROM VIDEO 2 WAS PCA
  - Everything done on the 2-D slice generalizes. Rotating the
    cloud onto its eigenvectors so the widest direction becomes
    the first axis is PCA in two dimensions. See the before and
    after figure from cell 10 of 7.1.what_pca_is.ipynb: left panel
    is the original plot, right panel is after PCA with PC1
    horizontal and PC2 vertical.
  - With four features it is the same idea in 4-D: rotate onto
    the principal components, then keep the top ones. You cannot
    draw the 4-D rotation, but the math does not care (added
    remark). The covariance matrix is 4 by 4, it has four
    eigenvectors, and they are still orthonormal and still sorted
    by variance.

7. WHAT IS NEXT
  - We know what PCA is: rotate onto the principal components,
    keep the top ones. We know why: too many correlated features,
    and we want a few informative ones and a picture we can see.
  - Next video: stop drawing by hand and run PCA on the full
    four-feature data set with scikit-learn, including the
    practical step that has been postponed, standardization.

8. KEY TAKEAWAYS
  - PCA = find the eigenvectors of the covariance matrix, use
    them as new axes. The axes are the principal components.
  - PC1 holds the most variance, PC2 the most of what is left,
    perpendicular to PC1, and so on.
  - The penguins have four numeric features. Looking at them by
    eye means a pair plot: six scatterplots for four features,
    45 for ten, nearly 200 for twenty.
  - Correlated features are redundant. Redundancy is what lets
    PCA drop dimensions without losing much.
  - Two payoffs: dimensionality reduction (keep the top few
    components) and decorrelation (the new axes are uncorrelated).
  - The Video 2 rotation was already PCA in two dimensions.

9. QUIZ-SAFE FACTS
  - Principal Component Analysis: identify the eigenvectors of
    the covariance matrix and use them as new axes to reposition
    the data.
  - The new axes are called principal components: PC1, PC2, and
    so on.
  - PC1 captures the most variance. PC2 captures the most of what
    is left and is perpendicular to PC1.
  - The Palmer Penguins data have four numeric features: bill
    length, bill depth, flipper length, body mass.
  - Four features need six pairwise scatterplots. Ten features
    need 45. Twenty features need nearly 200.
  - The grid of all pairwise scatterplots is a pair plot. Its
    diagonal shows histograms (value on x, count on y).
  - The flipper length versus body mass slice from Videos 1 and 2
    is one tile of the pair plot.
  - Features are often redundant because they are correlated.
    Professor's examples: height and weight, left arm and right
    arm.
  - Flipper length and body mass rise together. Bill depth trends
    opposite to the others.
  - The two payoffs of PCA: dimensionality reduction and
    decorrelation.
  - Dimensionality reduction: keep the top few principal
    components, drop the rest.
  - Decorrelation: the new axes are perpendicular and
    uncorrelated, each carrying independent information.
  - Rotating the 2-D cloud onto its eigenvectors is PCA in two
    dimensions. With four features it is the same rotation in
    4-D.
  - Next step in the course: run PCA with scikit-learn, with
    standardization as part of the process.
