1. THREE OPEN QUESTIONS
  - Video 4 ran PCA end to end and left a 2-D picture with three
    loose ends:
      Two components were kept by eye. What is the actual rule?
      The new axes were a black box. What do PC1 and PC2 mean?
      The species labels were never used. What happens when they
        finally are?
  - This video answers all three in that order, then closes with
    a cautionary tale about what plain correlations can hide.
  - The notebook's first code cell rebuilds the Video 4 result: load
    the penguins, drop NAs on the four features, StandardScaler,
    PCA().fit, and it keeps the explained_variance_ratio_, its
    cumulative sum, and the species column for later. It also
    defines a separate species color set, distinct from the
    geometry palette, locked from this video on.

2. THE SCREE PLOT
  - The Video 4 bar chart of percent variance per component has
    an official name: a scree plot. The professor's memory hook:
    it is "screen" without the n at the end.
  - KEY TERM: scree plot: variance explained plotted against
    component number, PC1, PC2, PC3, and so on along the x-axis.
    The notebook draws the per-component share and the cumulative
    share on one 0 to 100 percent axis, with a dashed line at the
    90 percent target. See the figure from cell 4 of
    9.1.Choosing_components_and_reading_the_results.ipynb.
  - Two standard rules for reading it: the elbow, and a variance
    target.

3. RULE ONE: THE ELBOW
  - Follow the curve until it flattens. The bend is the elbow,
    named for the joint in a human arm. Past it, extra components
    stop buying you much.
  - KEY TERM: elbow: the point on the scree plot where the curve
    turns from steep to flat, marking the point of diminishing
    returns.
  - KEY TERM: point of diminishing returns: the point after which
    each additional component adds much less than the one before
    (added definition). You still gain, but not enough to justify
    the extra dimension.
  - The professor's reading of the penguin plot: the PC1 point is
    the base of the arm, the PC2 point is the elbow, and after
    that the arm flattens out completely. So stop after PC2. The
    cumulative line shows the same thing even more clearly: it
    barely moves after a point.

4. RULE TWO: A VARIANCE TARGET
  - Decide in advance how much total variance you want to keep,
    often 90 percent, and take as many components as it takes to
    clear that line.
  - KEY TERM: variance target: a cumulative-variance threshold
    chosen before looking, used as the stopping rule (added
    definition). It replaces eyeballing with a number.
  - On the penguins the 90 percent target is the green dashed
    line. With two components the cumulative is 88 percent, very
    close to the target, and the professor decides to keep two.
    The notebook's wording: the curve bends hard after PC2, the
    cumulative is in the high 80s by the second component and
    clears 90 just after, so "two, maybe three" is what the rules
    say, and Video 4's eyeball call was sound. Two it is, for a
    picture you can see.
  - Both rules point the same way here. They do not have to, and
    when they disagree you are making a judgment call between
    fewer dimensions and more retained variance (added remark).
  - An example where they disagree. Five features from the
    scikit-learn wine data set (alcohol, malic acid, flavanoids,
    color intensity, proline), standardized, PCA fit:
      per component: 42.9, 32.8, 12.1, 6.7, 5.6 percent
      cumulative: 42.9, 75.7, 87.7, 94.4, 100.0 percent
    The drops between consecutive components are 10.1, 20.7,
    5.4, and 1.1 points. The big drop lands between PC2 and PC3,
    and after PC3 the curve is flat, so the elbow reading says
    keep three. A 90 percent target says keep four (87.7 falls
    short, 94.4 clears it). An 80 percent target would say three.
    Same plot, and two, three, or four are all defensible. The
    one you pick depends on whether you need a 2-D picture, a
    compact model input, or a 90 percent guarantee.
  - Code for that scree reading, plus the loadings and class
    means used in sections 5 and 6:

      import numpy as np, pandas as pd
      from sklearn.datasets import load_wine
      from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
      from sklearn.decomposition import PCA

      feats = ['alcohol', 'malic_acid', 'flavanoids', 'color_intensity', 'proline']
      df_w = load_wine(as_frame=True).frame
      X_std = StandardScaler().fit_transform(df_w[feats])
      pca = PCA().fit(X_std)
      ratio = pca.explained_variance_ratio_ * 100
      cum = np.cumsum(ratio)
      print(ratio.round(1), cum.round(1), np.searchsorted(cum, 90) + 1, sep='\n')

      df_load = pd.DataFrame(pca.components_[:2].T, index=feats, columns=['PC1', 'PC2'])
      print(df_load.round(3))

      df_sc = pd.DataFrame(pca.transform(X_std)[:, :2], columns=['PC1', 'PC2'])
      df_sc['class'] = df_w['target']
      print(df_sc.groupby('class').mean().round(2))

    Output:

      [42.9 32.8 12.1  6.7  5.6]
      [ 42.9  75.7  87.7  94.4 100. ]
      4
                         PC1    PC2
      alcohol          0.588  0.228
      malic_acid      -0.105  0.613
      flavanoids       0.367 -0.535
      color_intensity  0.371  0.523
      proline          0.609 -0.110
              PC1   PC2
      class
      0      1.71 -0.51
      1     -1.22 -0.82
      2     -0.29  1.83

    np.searchsorted(cum, 90) + 1 is the variance-target rule as
    one line: the first component index at which the cumulative
    clears 90. The scree plot itself is a two-line matplotlib
    call on ratio and cum, omitted here.

5. THE REVEAL: COLOR THE PROJECTION BY SPECIES
  - Drumroll. The same PC1 versus PC2 projection from Video 4,
    the one built with no knowledge of species, is recolored by
    the species of each penguin. See the figure from cell 7 of
    9.1.Choosing_components_and_reading_the_results.ipynb.
  - The professor's reading: very good separation between the
    Gentoo penguins and the other two kinds, and some separation
    between the remaining two, though not as clean as the first.
  - The point: PCA never saw the labels. It looked only at the
    physical measurements. It did not classify the penguins. It
    reduced four numbers to two, and the biological groups fell
    out on their own, because the data were naturally separated
    and the reduction preserved that. That is the payoff Video 4
    set up and deliberately withheld.
  - The wine example, in numbers rather than colors: the data
    set carries a class label (three grape cultivars, coded 0, 1,
    2) that PCA never touched. Averaging the scores by class:
      class 0: PC1 1.71, PC2 -0.51
      class 1: PC1 -1.22, PC2 -0.82
      class 2: PC1 -0.29, PC2 1.83
    Classes 0 and 1 sit at opposite ends of PC1. Class 2 sits
    apart from both along PC2. Two axes built from chemistry
    alone, and the three cultivars land in three different
    corners. Same lesson, different bottle.

6. LOADINGS: WHAT PC1 AND PC2 MEAN
  - Someone will ask: if PC1 separates the species that well,
    tell me what PC1 is and I will use it as a filter. The
    answer: PC1 and PC2 are not one existing attribute picked
    out. They are composite attributes, a weighted combination of
    the values of the different attributes.
  - KEY TERM: loadings: the weights in that combination, one
    weight per original feature per component. They live in the
    pca.components_ array: row 0 holds PC1's four weights, row 1
    holds PC2's.
  - KEY TERM: composite attribute: a new variable formed by
    combining several original variables with weights (added
    definition). A score on PC1 is each standardized feature
    times its PC1 loading, summed.
  - The bar chart from cell 10 of
    9.1.Choosing_components_and_reading_the_results.ipynb shows
    the loadings, orange bars for PC1 and blue bars for PC2, one
    pair per feature.
  - The professor's reading, with the notebook's gloss:
      PC1 weighs bill length, flipper length, and body mass
        positively, and bill depth negatively. Moving along PC1
        means a penguin that is longer and heavier with a
        shallower bill. That single axis is what most separates
        Gentoos from the other two species.
      PC2 has high values for bill length and bill depth
        together, zero for flipper length, and very little for
        body mass. It is a bill-shape axis, largely independent
        of overall body size.
  - So, roughly, and the professor says it is not 100 percent:
    PC1 = body size and bill shallowness, PC2 = bill shape. That
    is what the black box was doing all along.
  - How to read a loadings table in general (added guidance):
      Big absolute value: that feature matters a lot to this
        component. Near zero: it barely participates.
      Same sign as another feature: they move together along
        this component. Opposite sign: the component contrasts
        them.
      The overall sign of a component is arbitrary. Flipping
        every loading in PC1 flips every PC1 score, and nothing
        about the picture changes except which way is left.
        Compare signs within a component, not across runs.
      The loadings are unit vectors (the eigenvectors), so the
        squared loadings in one component sum to 1.
  - The wine loadings from the section 4 code:
      PC1: alcohol 0.588, malic acid -0.105, flavanoids 0.367,
        color intensity 0.371, proline 0.609.
      PC2: alcohol 0.228, malic acid 0.613, flavanoids -0.535,
        color intensity 0.523, proline -0.110.
    PC1 loads positively and about equally on alcohol and
    proline, moderately on flavanoids and color intensity, and
    barely on malic acid: a "richness" axis, wines that are
    stronger, more concentrated, and more flavorful all at once.
    PC2 contrasts malic acid and color intensity (positive)
    against flavanoids (negative), with alcohol and proline
    much smaller: a "sharp and dark versus smooth" axis that has
    little to do with strength. Those are blends, exactly as the
    professor says. There is no ruler for "richness."
  - One wine by hand, to make "weighted combination" literal.
    The first wine's standardized values are (1.519, -0.562,
    1.035, 0.252, 1.013) in the feature order above. Multiply by
    the PC1 loadings and sum:
      1.519 x 0.588 + (-0.562) x (-0.105) + 1.035 x 0.367
        + 0.252 x 0.371 + 1.013 x 0.609 = 2.042
    scikit-learn's transform reports 2.042 for that wine's PC1
    score. Same number. That is all a score is.

7. WHAT WE GAINED, AND WHAT WE GAVE UP
  - The trajectory: four dimensions with some correlation,
    reduced to two axes that keep about 88 percent of the total
    variance. The picture can be seen and read, and because the
    axes were built along the highest variance, the correlation
    among them has been removed.
  - The cost, stated honestly: the axes are blends, composites.
    They do not map directly to one attribute. "PC1" is not
    something you can put a ruler on. And the roughly 12 percent
    of variation living in PC3 and PC4 is discarded.
  - For visualization and preprocessing that trade is usually a
    bargain. When every last feature matters, it may not be. That
    trade-off is the judgment PCA always asks of you.

8. A CAUTIONARY TALE: SIMPSON'S PARADOX
  - Simpson the mathematician, not Homer. An interesting
    phenomenon that shows up in this very data set, and the
    reason coloring by group matters so much.
  - Set PCA aside and look at two raw features, bill length and
    bill depth, for all penguins at once. See the two-panel
    figure from cell 14 of
    9.1.Choosing_components_and_reading_the_results.ipynb: left
    panel is all penguins pooled with one trend line, right panel
    is the same points split by species with a trend line each.
  - Pooled, the relationship between bill length and bill depth
    is negative. Split by species, every single group shows a
    positive relationship. The pooled trend is not just weaker.
    It points the wrong way.
  - KEY TERM: Simpson's paradox: the behavior of a data set as a
    whole is completely different from the behavior of the data
    set once you separate it into groups. An aggregate can
    reverse the pattern present in every subgroup.
  - KEY TERM: trend line: the straight line fit through a
    scatterplot (the notebook uses np.polyfit with degree 1),
    whose slope sign says whether y rises or falls with x (added
    definition).
  - The explanation, in general and in this case: there is
    typically another hidden variable you are not considering.
    Here the hidden variable is species. Another way to think
    about it is how many measurements each species has. Either
    way, the grouping was driving the pattern and the pooled view
    threw the grouping away. This happens often in data.
  - KEY TERM: hidden variable: a variable that affects the
    relationship you are looking at but is not on either axis
    (added definition). Species is one. Any grouping can be one.
  - An example. Ninety employees across three departments, years
    of experience against salary in thousands. Support staff have
    the most years and the lowest pay band, management the fewest
    years and the highest band. Within every department, more
    years means more pay:

      import numpy as np, pandas as pd

      rng = np.random.default_rng(11)
      rows = []
      for dept, base, start in [('support', 40, 10), ('engineering', 70, 5), ('management', 100, 0)]:
          yrs = start + rng.uniform(0, 8, 30) ## years of experience
          sal = base + 1.5 * yrs + rng.normal(0, 3, 30) ## salary, thousands
          rows += list(zip([dept] * 30, yrs, sal))
      df_s = pd.DataFrame(rows, columns=['dept', 'years', 'salary_k'])

      print('pooled', np.polyfit(df_s['years'], df_s['salary_k'], 1)[0].round(2))
      for dept, g in df_s.groupby('dept'):
          print(dept, np.polyfit(g['years'], g['salary_k'], 1)[0].round(2))

    Output:

      pooled -3.03
      engineering 1.32
      management 1.44
      support 1.18

    Pooled, every extra year of experience costs about 3,030
    dollars. Within each department, every extra year pays 1,180
    to 1,440 dollars more. The pooled line is answering a
    different question ("which department has the veterans?")
    than the one you asked ("does experience pay?"). The hidden
    variable is department.
  - Why the species coloring earlier was more than decoration:
    real structure hides inside subgroups, and responsible data
    science means always asking whether a grouping is secretly
    driving, or hiding, the pattern you see.
  - Further reading offered by the notebook: Downey, Probably
    Overthinking It, chapter 10, which tours this effect on the
    same penguin data. Pitt students can read it free through the
    library link in cell 15.

9. CLOSING THE ARC
  - Five videos, one data set. Video 1, points and arrows. Video
    2, the covariance matrix hands over the best directions as
    eigenvectors. Video 3, the procedure is named PCA and its two
    payoffs are explained. Video 4, PCA for real with
    scikit-learn. Video 5, choose the components, read the axes,
    and stay honest about what an aggregate can hide.
  - The professor's summary of what PCA does: it eliminates the
    correlation among the data and reduces the number of
    dimensions, but the transformation is not "pick the best
    attributes." It is a blend of the attributes that generates
    the final dimensions.
  - From here PCA is a tool: a preprocessing step that turns
    many correlated features into a few informative ones before
    they go to the models ahead, useful particularly for
    high-dimensional data you want to reduce without losing too
    much information.

10. KEY TAKEAWAYS
  - Scree plot: variance explained versus component number. Two
    reading rules: the elbow (where the curve flattens) and a
    variance target (often 90 percent).
  - Penguins: elbow at PC2, 88 percent with two components, keep
    two. Both rules agree.
  - Coloring the projection by species shows Gentoos well
    separated, the other two partly. PCA never saw the labels.
  - Loadings (pca.components_) are the weights that build each
    component from the features. PC1 = body size and bill
    shallowness (bill depth loads negative). PC2 = bill shape.
  - Gained: a picture, decorrelated axes, 88 percent of variance.
    Gave up: 12 percent of variance, and axes that are blends
    rather than measurements.
  - Simpson's paradox: pooled bill length versus bill depth
    trends negative, every species trends positive. The hidden
    variable is species.

11. QUIZ-SAFE FACTS
  - The plot of percent variance per principal component is
    called a scree plot.
  - Elbow rule: keep components up to where the curve flattens,
    the point of diminishing returns.
  - Variance target rule: choose a threshold in advance (90
    percent is the usual example) and keep enough components to
    reach it.
  - On the penguins the elbow is at PC2, two components keep 88
    percent, close to the 90 percent target, and two are kept.
  - In the species-colored projection, Gentoo is well separated
    from the other two species. The other two separate less
    cleanly.
  - PCA did not use the species labels. The separation emerged
    from the measurements alone.
  - PC1 and PC2 are composite attributes, weighted combinations
    of the original attributes. The weights are called loadings
    and are stored in pca.components_.
  - PC1 weighs bill length, flipper length, and body mass
    positively and bill depth negatively. PC2 has high weights on
    bill length and bill depth, zero on flipper length, and very
    little on body mass.
  - Rough meaning: PC1 is body size and bill shallowness, PC2 is
    bill shape.
  - Two components keep about 88 percent of the total variance.
    About 12 percent is discarded with PC3 and PC4.
  - The trade-off of PCA: fewer, decorrelated dimensions in
    exchange for axes that are blends, not direct attributes.
  - Simpson's paradox: the whole data set behaves differently
    from the data set split into groups. Named for a
    mathematician, not Homer.
  - Penguin case: bill length versus bill depth is negative
    pooled and positive within each species.
  - Cause: a hidden variable not being considered, here the
    species. The professor also points to how many measurements
    each species has.
  - PCA is a useful preprocessing step for high-dimensional data
    you want to reduce without losing too much information.
